To:      Jacqui Roberts <Jacqui.Roberts@health.qld.gov.au>
Cc:      Emily Petering <emily.petering@together.org.au>;
         Terry McQuillan <Terry.McQuillan@health.qld.gov.au>
Subject: RE: Follow up on Enquiries

---

Good morning Jacqui,

Thank you again for your time this week.

Stage 2 grievance referral

I confirm that I withdraw the Stage 2 grievance referral.

I would rather resolve the outstanding matters directly with you, as we have been
doing, than have them run through a formal process at the same time. I record, for
completeness, that the withdrawal is of the referral itself. The underlying requests
— restoration of pay, recrediting of the leave debited since 3 July 2026, and
implementation of the adjustments certified in the Employee Capability Checklist of
3 July 2026 — remain outstanding and are not abandoned by this withdrawal.

AVAC and leave

On 24 August 2026 you kindly advised that you would speak with Ms Taylor that
afternoon about applying my leave, and I had asked that an AVAC be submitted on my
behalf so that my entitlements could be processed. Could you please let me know
where that now stands, and whether the AVAC has been submitted.

Correspondence with my treating psychiatrist

I provided the signed Limited Scope Authorisation for Disclosure of Medical
Information on 24 August 2026, which authorises Dr Ravikumar Bangalore Krishnaiah of
the Mind and Memory Service to prepare and provide a written report answering the
Health Service's questions.

Dr Ravikumar has advised me, as at 27 August 2026, that he is waiting on a response
from the Health Service before he provides the requested evidence. So that the report
is not held up, could the Health Service please make contact with his rooms directly:

    Dr Ravikumar Bangalore Krishnaiah
    Mind and Memory Service
    ravikumar@mindandmemoryservice.com.au
    reception@mindandmemoryservice.com.au
    (07) 5654 5580

I renew my request of 24 August 2026 that I be advised, in advance, of what
information is being shared with him, what questions are being asked, and what is
proposed to be included in any correspondence.

Any other updates

Finally, if there are any other updates on the matters we have discussed, I would be
grateful to receive them.

Kind regards,

Cory Shepherd
0417 400 227
coryshepherd1@hotmail.com
