BarNet Jade jade.io
Prizeman v Q-Comp - [2005] QIC 53
BarNet publication information - Date: Sunday, 07.06.2026 - - Publication number: 00002 - - User: coryshepherd1@hotmail.com

View this document in a browser
Attribution
Original court site URL: file://[2005] QIC 53.rtf
Content retrieved: June 12, 2020
Download/print date: June 07, 2026
INDUSTRIAL COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Worker’s Compensation and Rehabilitation Act 2003 – s. 561 – appeal against decision of industrial
magistrate
Merle Prizeman AND Q-COMP
(C/2005/30)
PRESIDENT HALL 14 September 2005
DECISION
By a letter dated 2 March 2004, a self insurer rejected Ms Prizeman’s application for compensation
under the WorkCover Queensland Act 1996 . The claim was rejected because the psychiatric
/psychological disorder relied upon was withdrawn from the definition of “injury” by the operation
of s. 34(5)(a) of the WorkCover Queensland Act 1996 (s. 32 of the Workers’ Compensation and
Rehabilitation Act 2003 replicates s. 34 of the WorkCover Queensland Act 1996 however it is
unnecessary to determine which Act applies). Ms Prizeman sought a statutory review. By a letter of
4 June 2004 Q-COMP confirmed the decision of the self insurer. Ms Prizeman then appealed to the
Industrial Magistrates Court. Her Appeal was unsuccessful. She now Appeals to this Court.
It is useful to make some preliminary observations.
One. Because Ms Prizeman had experienced significant stressors in her life which were entirely
unrelated to her employment with Coles Myer Ltd, there was initially some apprehension that her
BarNet publication information - Date: Sunday, 07.06.2026 - - Publication number: 00002 - - User: coryshepherd1@hotmail.com

admitted condition was not a condition to which her employment had been a significant contributing
factor. A conclusion that the employment was not a significant contributing factor to the physical
injury would have been fatal to the submission that Ms Prizeman suffered an “injury” for the
purposes of the WorkCover Queensland Act 1996 . In her dealings with the self insurer and in her
dealings with Q-COMP and subsequently on the Appeal to the Industrial Magistrates Court, Ms
Prizeman relied heavily on an opinion from a psychologist “Ms Dormer”. By her report of 5
January 2003 Ms Dormer observed, inter alia:
“Ms Prizeman’s work history will be covered in the questions following. It is important to note
though that it appears that Ms Prizeman’s attitude to her work was one of dedication and
enjoyment. It is apparent that her work was an integral part of her identity and that it offered her
stability and outside support in some fairly difficult times in her personal life. She states that she
has worked throughout her adult life and is reportedly a long term employee of Coles Myer.
… “As stated above and from the information that I have at this time, I consider the situation at Ms
Prizeman’s employment is a significant contributing factor to her anxiety and depression.”.
Importantly, Ms Dormer also observed:
“From my interview with her and from the documentation that I have read, it appears that Ms
Prizeman perceived that a situation developed between Ms Sturgess, the Store Manager, and herself
over the first half of 2003 (sic.) … However it is important to note that it is Ms Prizeman’s
interpretation of events and her method of handling the events must be taken into consideration.”.
Ms Dormer then went on to list particular dealings which Ms Prizeman had informed her had proved
stressful. I do not repeat the list, because the list relied upon before the Industrial Magistrate was
marginally different. But it was plainly that list which triggered concern that the “injury” had been
withdrawn from the definition by s. 34(5)(a) of the WorkCover Queensland Act 1996 . And it must
be remembered that it is a consequence of s. 34(5)(b) of the WorkCover Queensland Act 1996 that,
in determining whether action was reasonable management action taken in a reasonable way by the
employer in connection with the worker’s employment, it is the reality of the employer’s conduct
and not the employee’s perception of it which must be taken into account.
Two. The case developed at first instance was that each of the work related stressors relied upon by
Ms Prizeman was withdrawn from consideration because it arose in the course of reasonable
management action taken in a reasonable way. In light of the subsequent decision in Q-COMP v
Education Queensland (2005) 179 QGIG 491, that approach may well be argued to be flawed. It
will be necessary to return to that matter subsequently. However, for present purposes, it is
BarNet publication information - Date: Sunday, 07.06.2026 - - Publication number: 00002 - - User: coryshepherd1@hotmail.com

important to note that the case developed at first instance let in a side issue viz. whether any
particular stressor had in fact contributed to Ms Prizeman’s decompensation. Some of the language
in the Industrial Magistrates Decision is, in my view, properly to be understood as developing that
alternative basis for putting a particular stressor aside.
Three. Very early on in His Honour’s decision, the Industrial Magistrate records that on an
“overall” basis the evidence of Ms Prizeman was to be preferred to the evidence of Ms Sturgess. It
has been contended that the Industrial Magistrate did not resolve conflicts in the evidence in
accordance with that finding. In my view, the Industrial Magistrate did resolve conflicts in the
evidence in accordance with that finding. His Honour did accept that dealings identified by Ms
Prizeman did occur. The point at which the Industrial Magistrate (on some occasions) declined to
act upon the evidence of Ms Prizeman was in terms of the detail about that which had occurred. The
Industrial Magistrate was simply distinguishing between Ms Prizeman’s perceptions and that which
had in fact occurred. And there is no suggestion that in taking that course, the Industrial Magistrate
was acting on the view that the perceptions and/or recollections of perceptions of a person who has
decompensated are inherently unreliable.
Four. The Industrial Magistrate examined the alleged stressful situations seriatim. For convenience,
I shall follow that course. However, I do wish to stress, that at the end of the day the Industrial
Magistrate (consistently with His Honour’s preliminary observations) rolled the dealings together
and made a global inquiry about whether the case fell within s. 34(5)(a) of the WorkCover
Queensland Act 1996 .
Five. Consistently with decisions such as Delaney v Q-COMP (2005) 178 QGIG 197, I stress that
the Appeal against the decision of Q-COMP is an Appeal to the Industrial Magistrates Court. The
further Appeal to this Court is an Appeal for the purposes of correction of error. Conclusions upon
factual matters reasonably open to the Industrial Magistrate are not to be interfered with. Subject to
the limitations developed in Fox v Percy (2003) 214 CLR 118, the findings of primary fact based on
an evaluation of a witness seen and heard by the Industrial Magistrate are not to be departed from. I
turn then to the dealings examined by the Industrial Magistrate. At the outset, the Industrial
Magistrate summarised the dealings relied upon as follows:
“The main incidents, apparently initially relied upon by the Appellant, are as follows:
1. the so-called “Black dress” matter.
2. the initial staff meeting held by Ms Sturgess when she advised the staff, inter alia, that their
jobs were on the line.
3. the one-on-one meeting of 2/6/03 about the need for spot balances – the discussion planner
document, the discrepancy of $40.00, and the attitude and demeanour of Ms Sturgess during
that meeting.
4.
BarNet publication information - Date: Sunday, 07.06.2026 - - Publication number: 00002 - - User: coryshepherd1@hotmail.com

4. the “red basket” incident.
5. the spillage on the floor, on the same date.
6. the claims made about Ms Sturgess, calling her into her office, one Friday, and asking her if
she wanted her job or not, before she commenced recreation leave.”.
In the end result, the transactions labelled 1 and 2 were not relied upon before the Industrial
Magistrate. Neither were they relied upon on the Appeal to this Court. I put them aside.
The transaction labelled 3 was a serious one and was treated as such by the Industrial
Magistrate. His Honour reviewed the evidence over six pages. There is no doubt that Ms Prizeman
felt that she was being accused of stealing. There is equally no doubt that Ms Prizeman did not steal
the money. Neither is there any doubt that she was not being accused of stealing the money. The
evidence of Ms Prizeman was that she became very upset. (The evidence was corroborated). The
Industrial Magistrate concluded:
“It is the case though, that in the final analysis, in relation to the meeting conducted in the manner it
was, the following points emerge:
(a) the meeting itself was completely justified, for the reason stated.
(b) the appellant whilst addressed firmly, and with authority by her manager, was not
spoken to aggressively, or in any abusive manner.
(c) the appellant was given the opportunity to reply, to comment on the issue under
discussion, but for the greater part, for reasons not revealed, chose not to.
(d) a satisfactory resolution was reached, and the appellant did sign off on what was
agreed, although she seems to suggest now, that signing off was not entirely voluntary or
that she at least had some misgivings about doing so.
(e) the perception, of the appellant is that she was indirectly being accused of acting
inappropriately – dishonestly, in connection with the missing cash, and this was unfair.
(f) the perception, of the appellant that with there being no review, that she was thereby
going to suffer some unfairness, in relation to this issue, at some later date.
How the appellant considered any unfairness actually manifested itself was not expanded upon by
the appellant. I am not sure if she at any time actually referred to the situation being one that
resulted in unfairness to her. I accept that she considered her integrity and reputation might be
impugned because of (e), but in reality the respondent never any time suggested any punitive action
being taken against her, and had plans to continue with her employment, after she stopped work
with her illness, and at no time, in fact, considered she was dishonest. Any such argument, therefore
lacks a degree of substance, in reality. As to (f), the unfairness she perceived, was also not
detailed. I take it that, it was just the fact that a review was not specifically provided for, as is
normally the case that gave her some cause for concern, rather than any specific issue as such. It
was a general concern on her behalf. It seems that she considered that this might have the potential,
BarNet publication information - Date: Sunday, 07.06.2026 - - Publication number: 00002 - - User: coryshepherd1@hotmail.com

in some way, to disadvantage her, at some future date, in relation to circumstances not able to be
specified. Again, in the absence of other material, of the proof of that unfairness or unjust situation,
this argument is not a compelling one.”.
Granted that it was Ms Prizeman who carried the onus of proof in the approach taken by the
Industrial Magistrate and the findings which His Honour made seem to me to be entirely
understandable and, indeed, predictable.
The transactions labelled 4 and 5 were potentially significant because both occurred on the same day
and because both involved Ms Sturgess causing embarrassment to Ms Prizeman in the presence of
customers. The “red basket incident” concerned Ms Sturgess chiding Ms Prizeman in the presence
of customers about a red plastic basket belonging to the employer which she (Ms Sturgess) had
located in the car park. The latter incident concerned Ms Sturgess chastising Ms Prizeman in the
presence of others about a spillage of water from defective refrigeration equipment. In relation to
both incidents, the Industrial Magistrate was comfortable with finding that in taking action about the
“red basket” and about the “spillage” Ms Sturgess was engaging in reasonable management
action. That view, particularly in the case of the “water spillage” which gave rise to safety issues,
was plainly open to the Industrial Magistrate. The critical issue was whether the reasonable
management action was “reasonably taken”. Although the Industrial Magistrate was critical of the
way in which Ms Sturgess had conducted herself, on balance, His Honour came to the view that the
lapses from “proper or reasonable staff treatment” were but “blemishes”. Consistently with that
view and (I think) giving consideration to the issue whether the stressors should be put aside in any
event, the Industrial Magistrate commented that “neither incident was of long duration” and that it
was “difficult to assess the actual effect that same had on the appellant, based on comparatively brief
evidence provided to the court in relation to both incidents.”. Notwithstanding the skill with which
Mr Lippett has argued his case I am unable to conclude that the Industrial Magistrates’ conclusions
were not reasonably open to His Honour.
The transaction labelled 6 was a matter of major significance. In the event, though expressly (once
again) preferring the evidence of Ms Prizeman that the transaction had occurred to the evidence of
Ms Sturgess that it had not occurred, the Industrial Magistrate concluded:
“In the absence of some corroboration of the claim, I find that I cannot be satisfied that the appellant
was spoken to when and in the manner alleged.”.
I have gone to the transcript. The transcript shows that Ms Prizeman twice said that she had been
left with the “impression” that Ms Sturgess “didn’t want me in that position” and Ms Prizeman said
that she was “shocked”. There is also evidence of Ms Prizeman that Ms Sturgess had asked her to
“think if I wanted my job or not” and asked Ms Prizeman “whether I wanted a job or not”. The
evidence has to be read also with Ms Prizeman’s inability to articulate what she had found upsetting
BarNet publication information - Date: Sunday, 07.06.2026 - - Publication number: 00002 - - User: coryshepherd1@hotmail.com

about the meeting of 2 June 2003. On one view the noun “impression” was not Ms Prizeman’s
language but was suggested by a leading question. There was certainly a fresh complaint. But the
fresh complaint stifled an attack upon the evidence about the incident. It does not go to what was
said. At the end of the day in an issue about the reliability of evidence I must defer to the Industrial
Magistrate who saw and observed the witness over quite a period of time.
(For completeness, I should add that the Industrial Magistrate also considered a transaction outside
the original list relating to the cleanliness of the tills and service area but concluded that any
stressors arising from the transaction were not an issue. Having regard to the transcript and the way
in which the matter was argued on appeal, that conclusion seems to me to have been correct).
Having considered each of the items separately, the Industrial Magistrate then entered upon a global
consideration of three incidents, viz. the transactions labelled 3, 4 and 5. On His Honour’s findings
about the transaction labelled 6 it was inevitable that His Honour would leave that issue out of
account. Having referred to the item involving the “red basket” and the item involving “spillage on
the floor” as “blemishes”, the Industrial Magistrate returned to the points which His Honour had
found to emerge from the evidence about the pre-recreation leave meeting (set about above),
reiterated that there was nothing untoward about points (a) to (d), returned to the point that any
“unfairness” said to arrive out of (e) and (f) had not been identified and concluded spelling the word
in higher case that “overall”, the Appellant had failed to prove that the incidents were other than
reasonable management action taken reasonably. Given the findings of primary fact, I am unable to
conclude that the Industrial Magistrate’s decision was not open to His Honour.
I should return briefly to the decision in Q-COMP v Education Queensland (2005) 179 QGIG
491. I do so because an Appeal by way of rehearing is to be determined on the basis of the law as it
is understood to be at the time that the Appeal is determined, Victorian Stevedoring and General
Contracting Co Pty Ltd and Meakes v Dignan (1931) 46 CLR 73 at 107 per Dixon J.
With hindsight, the Industrial Magistrate’s inability to make findings about what was said and done
at the pre-recreation leave meeting labelled 6 is decisive. Although Ms Dormer’s report seems to
suggest that it was the combination of stressors which caused Ms Prizeman to decompensate, in re-
examination the following exchange occurred between Mr Lippett (for Ms Prizeman) and Ms
Dormer:
“Q. Was it just the changes that seemed to make her anxious or was it a combination of things?
A. No, it was mostly the request that – that did she still want her job?”.
BarNet publication information - Date: Sunday, 07.06.2026 - - Publication number: 00002 - - User: coryshepherd1@hotmail.com

The Industrial Magistrate’s inability to make a finding about what was said in the course of the
meeting makes it impossible to class the transaction as other than “reasonable management action
reasonably taken” and on the test in Q-COMP v Education Queensland, op cit, that was sufficient to
remove the psychiatric/psychological disorder from the definition of “injury”.
I dismiss the Appeal.
I reserve all questions as to costs.
Dated 14 September 2005.
D.R. HALL, President. Appearances:
Mr F. Lippett instructed by Sciacca’s Lawyers and Consultants for
the Appellant.
Mr P. Major directly instructed for the Respondent.
Released: 14
September 2005
Cited by:
Lee v Workers' Compensation Regulator [2025] QIRC 199 (31 July 2025)
243. The Respondent submits that in determining whether the management action in this case
was reasonable or not, 'it is the reality of the employer's conduct and not the employee's
perception of it which must be taken into account'. [283] The Respondent says that
accordingly, 'reasonable' should be treated as meaning 'reasonable in all the circumstances of
the case'.[284]
via
[283] Prizeman v Q-COMP [2005] QIC 53 per Hall P .
Neale v Workers' Compensation Regulator [2023] QIRC 9 (16 January 2023) (Pidgeon IC)
[199] The Respondent says that the failure to implement the draft return-to-work plan is at best
a 'blemish' [281] as far as Mr Neale's case goes. The Respondent says that an imperfection in
management action will not automatically result in characterising the action as management
action which is unreasonable. [282] The Respondent goes on to say that management action need
not be perfect [283] and that in determining whether the action in this case was reasonable or not,
'it is the reality of the employer's conduct and not the employee's perception of it which must be
taken into account'. [284]
BarNet publication information - Date: Sunday, 07.06.2026 - - Publication number: 00002 - - User: coryshepherd1@hotmail.com

via
[284] Prizeman v Q-COMP [2005] QIC 53 .
Robinson v Workers' Compensation Regulator [2016] QIRC 32 (15 March 2016)
Prizeman v QComp [2005] QIC 53
Cowen v Bunnings Group Ltd
Robinson v Workers' Compensation Regulator [2016] QIRC 32 (15 March 2016)
[125] The management action taken was reasonable and taken in a reasonable manner by the
employer [s 32(5)(a)]. The onus lies with the Appellant to prove that Mr Davidson's actions were
unreasonable actions and the Appellant has failed to discharge that onus [6] .
via
[6] Prizeman v QComp [2005] QIC 53 per Hall P .
Carlton v Simon Blackwood (Workers' Compensation Regulator) [2015] QIRC 150 (10 August 2015)
10. In Workcover Queensland v Kehl ,[4] Hall P when determining whether management action
was reasonable or whether management action was taken in a reasonable way, took the
position there was no reason why "reasonable" should not be treated as meaning "reasonable
in all the circumstances of the case". Accordingly, the use of the word "reasonable" indicates
that an objective test is to be applied to the management action and "it is the reality of the
employer's conduct and not the employee's perception of it which must be taken into
account"; (see Prizeman v QCOMP [2005] QIC 53 ; 180 QGIG 48).
Chapman v Simon Blackwood (Workers' Compensation Regulator) [2015] QIRC 132 (16 July 2015)
(Industrial Commissioner Thompson)
[126] The facts as alleged by Chapman must truly form a reasonable basis for a definite
conclusion to be affirmatively drawn of truth of which the Commission may be reasonably
satisfied. To reach that conclusion Chapman seeks the Commission to identify with each of the
stressors as being stressors which have given rise either singularly or cumulatively out of
management action that allegedly was unreasonable and causative of his condition. Each of the
stressors relied upon must be considered as a global evaluation of the actions is the Regulator's
understanding of the case so as to identify with unreasonableness. Applying the considerations as
to whether in fact the events themselves constitute stressors or mere blemishes, recourse ought to
be given to Prizeman v Q-COMP [2] .
Chapman v Simon Blackwood (Workers' Compensation Regulator) [2015] QIRC 132 (16 July 2015)
(Industrial Commissioner Thompson)
[2] Prizeman v Q-COMP (2005) QIC 53
Parker v Q-Comp [2008] QSC 175 (15 August 2008) (Lyons J)
Prizeman v Q-Comp 180 QGIG; [2005] QIC 53 , cited
Parker v Q-Comp [2008] QSC 175 (15 August 2008) (Lyons J)
Prizeman v Q-Comp 180 QGIG; [2005] QIC 53 , cited
Parker v Q-Comp [2008] QSC 175 (15 August 2008) (Lyons J)
23. The appeal to the Industrial Court was governed by s 561 of the WCR Act which provides
that the appeal is by way of rehearing on the evidence and proceedings before the Industrial
Magistrate unless the Court orders additional evidence be heard. It is clear that the appeal to
BarNet publication information - Date: Sunday, 07.06.2026 - - Publication number: 00002 - - User: coryshepherd1@hotmail.com

23.
the Industrial Court is for the purpose of the correction of error and that “…conclusions
upon factual matters reasonably open to the Industrial Magistrate are not to be interfered
with.” [7]
via
[7] Prizeman v Q-Comp [2005] QIC 53 ; 180 QGIG, 48.
BarNet publication information - Date: Sunday, 07.06.2026 - - Publication number: 00002 - - User: coryshepherd1@hotmail.com