INDUSTRIAL COURT OF QUEENSLAND
CITATION: Simon Blackwood (Workers’ Compensation Regulator) v
Mahaffey [2016] ICQ 010
PARTIES: SIMON BLACKWOOD (WORKERS’ COMENSATION
REGULATOR)
(appellant)
v
SAMANTHA MAHAFFEY
(respondent)
FILE NO/S: C/2015/30
PROCEEDING: Appeal
DELIVERED ON: 7 April 2016
HEARING DATE: 24 September 2015
MEMBER: Martin J, President
ORDER/S: Appeal dismissed.
CATCHWORDS: WORKERS’ COMPENSATION – PROCEEDINGS TO
OBTAIN COMPENSATION – DETERMINATION OF
CLAIMS – APPEALS, JUDICIAL REVIEW AND STATED
CASES – GENERALLY – where the respondent claimed
compensation for psychological injuries said to have occurred
as a result of certain stressors including, among other things,
ongoing bullying, intimidation and harassment by her
employer, and not being provided with reasonable
management action to ensure she could appropriately deal with
hostile telephone calls and attendances from customers and
creditors – where the Commission found that the employer had
engaged in ongoing bullying, intimidation and harassment of
the appellant as she described, that this was not reasonable
management action taken in a reasonable way for the purposes
of s 32(5) of the Workers’ Compensation Act 2003 (the Act),
and that this was “the major significant factor” in her injury for
the purposes of s 32(1) of the Act – where the Commission also
found that the injury, to the extent it was caused by the hostile
phone calls, arose in the course of reasonable management
action for the purposes of s 32(5) of the Act – whether the
Commission erred in proceeding on the basis that although a
particular stressor is a cause of a psychiatric or psychological
disorder and arises out of, or in the course of, reasonable
management action reasonably taken, the psychiatric or
psychological disorder is nevertheless not excluded from the
definition of “injury” in s 32(1) if it is also the result of other
stressors

2
Workers’ Compensation and Rehabilitation Act 2003, s 32(1),
s 32(5)
CASES: Bird v the Commonwealth (1988) 165 CLR 1, applied
Comcare v PVYW (2013) 250 CLR 246, cited
Davis v Simon Blackwood (Workers’ Compensation
Regulator) [2014] ICQ 009, cited
Hewitt v Benale Pty Ltd [2002] WASCA 163, (2002) 27
WAR 91, cited
IW v City of Perth (1997) 197 CLR 1, cited
Khoury v Government Insurance Office (NSW) (1984) 165
CLR 622, cited
Parker v Q-COMP (2007) 185 QGIG 269, cited
Q-COMP AND Malcolm Hochen (C/2009/47) – Decision
<http://www.qirc.qld.gov.au>, cited
Q-COMP v Education Queensland (McArthur’s Case) (2005)
179 QGIG 491, cited
Q-COMP v Hohn (2008) 187 QGIG 139, cited
Q-COMP v Rowe (2009) 191 QGIG 67, cited
Rodgers v Revenue SA [2014] SASCFC 2, (2014) 240 IR 202,
cited
Simon Blackwood (Workers’ Compensation Regulator) v
Adams [2015] ICQ 001, cited
Simon Blackwood (Workers’ Compensation Regulator) v
Mahaffey [2015] QIRC 116, cited
Vesna Misevski v Q-COMP (C/2009/29) – Decision
<http://www.qirc.qld.gov.au>, cited
Victims Compensation Fund v Brown (2003) 201 ALR 260,
cited
APPEARANCES: S Gray directly instructed for the appellant
M Horvath instructed by Quinn & Scattini for the respondent
[1] This appeal raises, again, the proper application of s 32(1) and s 32(5) of the Workers’
Compensation and Rehabilitation Act (the Act). At the relevant time, s 32 took the
following form:1
“32 Meaning of injury
(1) An injury is personal injury arising out of, or in the course of, employment if
the employment is a significant contributing factor to the injury.
(2) However, employment need not be a significant contributing factor to the
injury if section 34(2) or 35(2) applies.
(3) Injury includes the following—
1 See the Act current at 14 August 2012.

3
(a) a disease contracted in the course of employment, whether at or away
from the place of employment, if the employment is a significant
contributing factor to the disease;
(b) an aggravation of the following, if the aggravation arises out of, or in
the course of, employment and the employment is a significant
contributing factor to the aggravation—
(i) a personal injury;
(ii) a disease;
(iii) a medical condition if the condition becomes a personal injury or
disease because of the aggravation;
(c) loss of hearing resulting in industrial deafness if the employment is a
significant contributing factor to causing the loss of hearing;
(d) death from injury arising out of, or in the course of, employment if the
employment is a significant contributing factor to causing the injury;
(e) death from a disease mentioned in paragraph (a), if the employment is
a significant contributing factor to the disease;
(f) death from an aggravation mentioned in paragraph (b), if the
employment is a significant contributing factor to the aggravation.
(4) For subsection (3)(b), to remove any doubt, it is declared that an aggravation
mentioned in the provision is an injury only to the extent of the effects of the
aggravation.
(5) Despite subsections (1) and (3), injury does not include a psychiatric or
psychological disorder arising out of, or in the course of, any of the following
circumstances—
(a) reasonable management action taken in a reasonable way by the
employer in connection with the worker’s employment;
(b) the worker’s expectation or perception of reasonable management
action being taken against the worker;
(c) action by the Authority or an insurer in connection with the worker’s
application for compensation.
Examples of actions that may be reasonable management actions taken in a
reasonable way—

4
• action taken to transfer, demote, discipline, redeploy, retrench or dismiss the worker
• a decision not to award or provide promotion, reclassification or transfer of, or leave
of absence or benefit in connection with, the worker’s employment.”
The decision appealed from
[2] The respondent (Ms Mahaffey) was employed by Mt Cotton Constructions for about six
months in 2012. Her claim that she had developed severe psychological injuries as a result
of that employment was accepted by WorkCover but rejected by the Regulator.
[3] Pursuant to the usual direction, the following Statement of Stressors was provided by Ms
Mahaffey:
No Event / Short Description
1 Ongoing intimidation, bullying and/or harassment directed at or towards the
appellant by Chris Scroope (Managing Director) thereby creating a hostile work
environment that was threatening, intimidating and/or anxiety provoking.
2 The appellant was subjected to and/or exposed to ongoing complaints by
distressed co-workers in relation to the behaviour of Mr Scroope without
adequate instruction and/or training in relation to the task of counselling
distressed co-workers. Consequently, the appellant has been exposed to further
actions of Mr Scroope which are described as hostile, threatening, intimidating,
bullying and harassing by nature and generally create a hostile working
environment.
3 Failing to ensure that the appellant was able to be relieved of her work duties to
take regular breaks, including but not limited to morning tea, lunch break and/or
afternoon and regular restroom breaks.
4 Failing to ensure that the appellant was provided appropriate reasonable
management action in order to appropriately and adequately deal with and
manage hostile and abusive telephone calls and attendances by unsatisfied
customers or creditors.
[4] On the hearing of the appeal in the Commission2 it was not disputed that:
(a) Ms Mahaffey was a worker,
(b) She had suffered a personal injury, namely, a psychiatric or psychological
disorder,
2 [2015] QIRC 116.

5
(c) There was sufficient evidence to support a finding that the injury was one
which arose out of, or in the course of, Ms Mahaffey’s employment and that
her employment was a significant contributing factor.
[5] The expert psychiatric evidence was to the effect that the cause of the disorder was a
combination of:
(a) The bullying, intimidatory and aggressive behaviour of the managing director
(Mr Scroope),
(b) The stress caused by dealing with hostile telephone calls from her employer’s
creditors, and
(c) The perceived lack of support to help her deal with those calls.
[6] The Deputy President correctly identified the issue for him to decide as being “whether
the injury arose out of, or in the course of, management action which was both reasonable
and taken in a reasonable way in connection with the appellant's employment, thereby
removing it from the definition of ‘injury’ for the purposes of the [Act].”3
[7] The Deputy President found that Mr Scroope’s behaviour had been as Ms Mahaffey
described it and held that it was “the major significant factor” in her injury.
Grounds of appeal
[8] The grounds of appeal are as follows:
(a) having determined that Ms Mahaffey’s injury was not an “injury” as defined
by the Act; because it arose in the course of reasonable management action
in connection with Ms Mahaffey’s employment so far as it related to “the
hostile phone calls”, the learned Deputy President erred by finding that Ms
Mahaffey’s workers’ compensation claim should be accepted;
(b) the learned Deputy President erred in his interpretation and determination of
those matters relating to Ms Mahaffey’s nominated “stressor number 2”;
(c) having found that Ms Mahaffey most likely had not proved the facts and
matters particularised as “stressor number 3”, his Honour erred by failing to
determine that those matters relating to stressor number 3 were reasonable
management action, taken in a reasonable way, in connection with Ms
Mahaffey’s employment; and
(d) in finding that the management action was not reasonable management
action, taken in a reasonable way, in connection with Ms Mahaffey’s
employment; the learned Deputy President erred by enquiring whether
3 Simon Blackwood (Workers’ Compensation Regulator) v Mahaffey [2015] QIRC 116 at [5].

6
“unreasonable management action” was the major significant factor to the
development of Ms Mahaffey’s psychiatric disorder.
[9] In his written submissions, Mr Gray identified what he described as the “critical errors”
in the decision which require intervention in this appeal. They are:
(a) having found that Ms Mahaffey’s injury was excluded by the reasonable
management action provisions of the Act, in so far as it related to one stressor,
the Deputy President erred by finding that Ms Mahaffey’s injury could be
accepted because of a “dominant” stressor;
(b) the Deputy President misinterpreted the basis of Ms Mahaffey’s nominated
stressor number 2; and
(c) having observed that Ms Mahaffey most likely had not proved the matters
described within stressor 3, the Deputy President failed to determine that
stressor 3 was reasonable management action, taken in a reasonable way, in
connection with Ms Mahaffey’s employment.
The psychiatric evidence
[10] Before turning to a consideration of the grounds of appeal, it will assist if the expert
evidence is set out. Dr Chau provided a psychiatric report which was not as clear as it
might have been. Such a report should, at a minimum, discuss, and offer an opinion on:
(a) the subject’s psychiatric condition,
(b) what the subject told the psychiatrist about the employment, and
(c) the causal relationship (if any) between the employment and the condition.
[11] In the process of doing that, the psychiatrist should specifically consider the stressors
nominated by the subject and express a view, on the assumption that they will be
established, as to any causal relationship.
[12] In this case, the psychiatric report is not expressed in a helpful way. It did not give any
clear opinion on the part the stressors played. But that was remedied, to an extent, by the
oral evidence given. It was more relevant to the issues to be decided by the Commission.
[13] In examination in chief the following evidence was given:
“Doctor, what was the conclusion you reached with Ms Mahaffey whether she has
a psychiatric condition or not? ---I believe that she has a psychiatric condition being
the [indistinct] disorder with mixed anxiety, depressed mood, and an aggravation
of social phobia.

7
And did you consider the cause of that condition? --- Yes. I have.
And what was your conclusion about the cause of her condition? --- I think it
would be consistent with having been caused by what she is reporting to be
harassment at work by her employer.”4
[14] In cross-examination the doctor gave the following evidence:
“... Now, as I understand the opinion that you’ve expressed, or the summary and
conclusions, appears at page 18 of your report? --- Yes.
And what you say there is that she’s developed – or you have diagnosed [indistinct]
disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood? --- That’s right.
And you say that that’s as a result of feeling harassed by her employer at work in
Mount Cotton Constructions? --- That’s right.
But in addition to that, a contributing factor to the development of her injury
is what you there say:
In addition to this she believed she did not believe she received adequate
support or training during her course of employment.
? --- That’s right.
So that was another thing that contributed to the development of her injury?
--- That’s right.
And as you understand on the top of that page the statement of stressors, which are
one, two, three, four, all of those matters combined to cause Ms Mahaffey’s injury?
--- That’s right.
…
And if we look on the top of page 3 what she told you what she found stressful was
receiving abusive telephone calls from the clients, but importantly, the fact that she
believed she had no support from other staff? --- Uh-huh.
And so when you expressed your opinion you understood that she’s dealing with
all these by herself? --- Yes. That’s right.
And that her employer had actually put in no steps at all to help her deal with those
phone calls? --- That’s right.
4 T 1-79.

8
…
Because there’s a number of factors that all add towards causing the injury? --- Uh-
huh.
…
And it’s the statement of stressor is, one, two, three, four, all of these have a role to
play in the development of Ms Mahaffey’s injury? --- Yes.
…
Well, would you agree what obviously in respect to the development of Ms
Mahaffey’s injury having to deal with these phone calls was something that
was very significant in the development of her injury? --- I wouldn’t be able to
comment on that. Look I have – I didn’t actually question her about, you know,
which one developed first in terms of the stress. When she was talking to me
that certainly was part of the stress, I couldn’t say whether or not that was the
start of the stress. Where she – she particularly did mention the harassment.
Yes? --- Harassment being that she was quite scared of Scroope.
…
So given that she has that feeling about the phone calls, that’s got a very
significant contribution towards her injury? --- Yes. Sure.”5
[15] The following evidence came from re-examination:
“Doctor, just about that issue of the various contributing factor, you didn’t turn your
mind to teasing those out or separating how relevant each one of those was? --- No.
I mean, I did ask her was there anything in particular, and she said that it was the
whole situation of the harassment, which I had the impression was a very significant
factor, which is also wise she was more sensitive to situations of scrutiny, which is
very common in people with social phobia type of symptoms, when they are put
under scrutiny and feel harassed. They’re going to be even more sensitive, so on
page 6 [indistinct] paragraph, she avoided being in situations whereby she could
feel socially scrutinised, and she did mention that it was taking these abusive calls
and not getting enough support and not getting the breaks as well. It was a
combination of all factors that – especially the harassment. She was – she seemed
to be emphasising throughout the interview.
…
5 T 1-80–82.

9
In terms of the psychiatric condition she has and the extent of it, how does that
compare to her level stressors that she described to you? --- Well, the only stressor
that she told me about was the work stress, and I think that given her
personality type and as well as, you know, by looking at the previous comments
[indistinct] looking at the statements from other work colleagues, I think that
given the degree of verbal aggression or slamming doors, things like that, and
the uncertainty about the work stability, I think that that would be consistent
with the severity of symptoms that she developed.”6
The first ground
[16] This concerns Stressor 4.
[17] The finding which the appellant says supports this ground is as follows:
“[29] Management action need not be perfect or carried out "without blemish", so
long as it is "reasonable in all the circumstances of the case." It was not feasible to
entirely relieve the appellant from answering phone calls as this was integral to her
role in the business. The management action taken by Mr Cooper to address the
appellant's complaints was reasonable in the circumstances. In my view, it cannot
be said that the injury, to the extent caused by the hostile phone calls, arose out of
management action. The injury arose out of dealing with the phone calls
independently of management action. However, I am satisfied that the injury, to
the extent it was caused by the hostile phone calls, arose in the course of
reasonable management action, being the steps taken by Mr Cooper in a
reasonable way to address the issue. Therefore it is not an "injury" as defined by
the Act, as it is removed from that definition by s 32(5).” (emphasis added,
citations omitted)
[18] The appellant argues that, having found that the injury was “excluded” because the
management action was reasonable etc., it was an error to find that Ms Mahaffey’s claim
could be accepted because there was other action which was not covered by s 32(5).
[19] This argument raises issues with respect to the proper construction of s 32 and the use of
a Statement of Stressors in a proceeding which I will deal with below. This paragraph of
his reasons, though, needs to be read in the context of the whole decision. It should be
read as a conclusion that, if the “phone call issue” was all that Ms Mahaffey relied upon,
then her claim would be excluded by the operation of s 32(5).
The second ground
[20] In his reasons, the Deputy President considered Stressors 1 and 2 together. In dealing with
them the Deputy President said:
“[32] It seems to me that a manager's interaction with staff, at least to the extent of
giving them directions, making requests of them, and so on, comfortably falls
6 T 1-83.

10
within the concept of management action. A manager's language, tone of voice and
demeanour are relevant to determining whether management action was taken in a
reasonable way.
[33] However, yelling at, name calling and belittling staff in this context could
never be said to be reasonable management action. As I have said, Mr Scroopes
acted in an unreasonable manner towards, and in front of, the appellant on a regular
basis. Other staff employed by him experienced similar emotions to that of the
appellant, some were teary, while others were stressed or anxious when they were
dealing, or had dealt, with Mr Scroopes or when he was in the vicinity of them in
the office. I accept the appellant regularly observed such behaviour and the effect
it had on those subjected to it. It was also directed at her on a handful of occasions.
This had a detrimental effect on her. Mr Scroopes' unacceptable behaviour and
demeanour created an environment in the office that was extremely unpleasant to
work within. Although the appellant was sensitive in nature, the result of working
within an environment where she was experiencing and observing that kind of
behaviour in my view, significantly contributed to the injury she suffered. From my
observation of the appellant it seems to me that Mr Scroopes' behaviour was
probably the major significant factor.
[34] It follows that the appellant's injury arose out of, or in connection with
management action which was neither reasonable nor taken in a reasonable way.”
(citations omitted)
[21] The Deputy President did not make a finding with respect to the matters referred to in the
first sentence of Stressor 2, that is, that Ms Mahaffey had been subjected to “ongoing
complaints by distressed co-workers” and so on. He did, though, clearly find that Stressor
1 had been made out. Both Stressor 1 and the second part of Stressor 2 refer to the creation
of a hostile work environment as a result of Mr Scroope’s behaviour. Thus, Ms Mahaffey
had made out the factual basis for the expert opinion so far as Mr Scroope’s behaviour
was concerned.
[22] The first part of Stressor 2 was not made out. The second part, when referring to the
hostile work environment, is premised – by the use of the word “consequently” – on the
occurrence of matters which were not proved. But, it does not refer to a different type of
work environment. Rather, Stressors 1 and 2 should be read as alleging two types of
conduct which lead to the same result. And the Deputy President’s reasons should be read
as an acceptance that Ms Mahaffey had established Stressor 1, but not 2, as the cause.
The third ground
[23] This ground refers to the following paragraph in the Deputy President’s reasons:
“[37] In the circumstances it is unnecessary to consider the remaining stressor - the
alleged failure to allow her adequate rest breaks, which I doubt, in any event, is
made out on the evidence.”

11
[24] The Deputy President did not make any finding about Stressor 3. As he said: “it is
unnecessary to consider the remaining stressor”. That is a consequence of his earlier
finding about Stressor 1.
[25] It does not follow that, because he expressed some doubt about whether Stressor 3 could
have been made out, he had formed a considered opinion that, on the balance of
probabilities, it could not have been made out. It was no more than a passing comment.
[26] In Misevski v Q-COMP7 Hall P was faced with a case in which there had been allegations
made about conduct which allegations “were found to be without substance”. He said:
“[30] … One consequence of course is that those transactions cannot have
contributed to the development of her psychological condition. A transaction which
did not occur cannot have contributed to the development of anything. Whilst s.
32(5)(b) of the Act refers to ‘perception’ it refers to perception of action actually
taken.”
[27] A similar situation arises here. The Deputy President did not accept that Ms Mahaffey’s
version should be accepted. It follows that the actions which she asserted constituted a
stressor were found not to have existed. She did not assert that the actions which were
found to have been taken contributed to her condition. Therefore, as it was not said by
her that her “injury” arose out of those actions, s 32(5) does not apply. Similarly, as the
psychiatrist’s opinion was based on an unaccepted set of assertions, there has been no
causal link established.
The fourth ground
[28] This ground argues that the Deputy President erred when considering whether
management action was reasonable management action etc. by asking whether
“unreasonable management action” was the major significant factor in the development
of Ms Mahaffey’s disorder. It is further argued that the Deputy President erred by
searching for a “dominant factor” and that he should not have assigned weight to
respective management action stressors.
[29] The Deputy President did not reason in that way. At [33] he said:
“However, yelling at, name calling and belittling staff in this context could
never be said to be reasonable management action. As I have said, Mr Scroopes
acted in an unreasonable manner towards, and in front of, the appellant on a
regular basis. Other staff employed by him experienced similar emotions to that of
the appellant, some were teary, while others were stressed or anxious when they
were dealing, or had dealt, with Mr Scroopes or when he was in the vicinity of them
in the office. I accept the appellant regularly observed such behaviour and the effect
it had on those subjected to it. It was also directed at her on a handful of occasions.
This had a detrimental effect on her. Mr Scroopes' unacceptable behaviour and
demeanour created an environment in the office that was extremely unpleasant to
work within. Although the appellant was sensitive in nature, the result of working
7 Vesna Misevski v Q-COMP (C/2009/29) – Decision <http://www.qirc.qld.gov.au>.

12
within an environment where she was experiencing and observing that kind of
behaviour in my view, significantly contributed to the injury she suffered. From
my observation of the appellant it seems to me that Mr Scroopes' behaviour
was probably the major significant factor.” (emphasis added)
[30] That analysis does not demonstrate any basis for the ground of appeal. The reference to
“unreasonable” (which follows the statement about yelling etc. never being able to be
described as reasonable management action) describes Mr Scroope’s manner not
management action. And the reference to “major significant factor” does not equate with
a search for a “dominant” factor.
[31] When the Deputy President said (in [36]) that it was necessary “in cases such as this, to
assign weight to the various factors which go to the creation of a psychiatric disorder” he was
not assigning weight to “respective management action stressors”, he was going through
the process of weighing up all the relevant factors.
What does s 32 require?
[32] This section has been the subject of consideration on many occasions. In this case, there
was conduct (the harassment) which was a cause of the disorder and which did not come
within s 32(5) and there was conduct (the telephone answering issue) which was a cause
of the disorder and which did come within s 32(5). Thus, the following question arises:
If a particular stressor is held:
(a) to have been a cause of a psychiatric or psychological disorder, and
(b) to have arisen out of, or in the course of, reasonable management action
reasonably taken, then
is the psychiatric or psychological disorder excluded from the definition of “injury”
in s 32(1) no matter what else may have caused the disorder?
[33] The appellant argues that the answer to that question must be “yes”.
[34] Before dealing with that question, two matters must first be dealt with:
(a) The use of a Statement of Stressors, and
(b) The proper construction of beneficial legislation.
Statement of Stressors
[35] The requirement for a worker to produce a Statement of Stressors does not arise from the
Act or any Regulation. The requirement comes from the standard direction given in these
matters. The purpose of this statement is, at least, twofold. First, it identifies for the

13
respondent those matters which the appellant will be contending were the cause of the
appellant’s disorder. Secondly, it serves to confine the issues which must be considered
on the appeal. Where such a direction has been given, then an appellant may not depart
from the Statement of Stressors without leave.
[36] The difficulty which arises is caused by attempting to apply the use of the Statement in
conjunction with the requirements of s 32 of the Act. The Act only requires the
demonstration of an “injury” as defined. It does not speak of “stressors”.
[37] Section 32 (1) is concerned with consideration of an injury which arises out of, or in the
course of, employment. In other words, it covers the whole gamut of the employment
relationship. It does not confine its operation to particular aspects of the employment,
rather, it emphasises that all of the employment is to be considered because an “injury”
will only come within the definition “if the employment is a significant contributing
factor to the injury”.
[38] A distinction can then be drawn with the provisions of s 32(5). Putting to one side s
32(5)(c), that section is concerned with “reasonable management action” which is
actually taken or a worker’s expectation or perception of such action. In other words, it is
concerned only with a “slice” of the employment.
[39] The use of a Statement of Stressors is to assist in the determination of a worker’s
entitlements. It must be used as an aid and not as a means of overriding the intention of
the Act.
[40] The question which arises in this case, and which has been set out above, could, if
answered in the way proposed by the appellant, lead to circumstances where a worker
who nominated two stressors would be denied compensation if one of those stressors was
reasonable management action etc., even if the unchallenged expert evidence was that its
contribution to the disorder was minimal. Similarly, the appellant’s answer would also
deny a worker compensation if a disorder was the result of ten stressors, each of equal
importance, but where one fell within s 32(5).
Beneficial legislation
[41] In order to determine if the Act should have that result, I turn to examine the nature of the
Act. It is properly described as “beneficial legislation”. In Bird v the Commonwealth8
Deane and Gaudron JJ (although in the minority) summarised the principle to be applied
in a way which has been followed9 many times:
“… It is well to remember that employee’s compensation legislation such as the
Act and regulations, is remedial in its character “and, like all such Acts, should be
constructed beneficially”: Bist v London & South Western Railway Co. The
“established principle” was correctly identified by Fullagar J in the course of his
8 (1988) 165 CLR 1.
9 For example, Rodgers v Revenue SA [2014] SASCFC 2, (2014) 240 IR 202; Hewitt v Benale Pty Ltd [2002]
WASCA 163, (2002) 27 WAR 91.

14
dissenting judgement in Wilson v Wilson’s Tile Works Pty Ltd : “where two
constructions of a Workers’ Compensation Act are possible that which is
favourable to the worker should be preferred.” If a person or a case falls within
the general spirit of such remedial legislation, and there are two possible
interpretations, the courts ought not to construe the Act so as to exclude that person
or case … . Indeed, in McDermott v Owners of SS Tintoretto, a case in which the
House of Lords read words into a provision of a Workmen’s Compensation Act in
favour of the employee, Lord Shaw commented that he regarded it “to be quite
unsound, and to be productive of wrong and mischief” to interpret such a remedial
statute “in the spirit of meticulous literalism”. That comment of Lord Shaw was
quoted with approval (“a valuable contribution”) by Isaacs J in George Hudson Ltd
v Australian Timber Workers’ Union.”10 (emphasis added, citations omitted)
[42] The approach described above is not without constraint. The interpretation adopted “must
be restrained within the confines of the actual language employed and what is fairly open
on the words used” – Khoury v Government Insurance Office (NSW)11. It was put this
way by Brennan CJ and McHugh J in IW v City of Perth12:
“… beneficial and remedial legislation, like the [Equal Opportunity] Act, is to be
given a liberal construction. It is to be given “a fair, large and liberal” interpretation
rather than one which is “literal or technical”. Nevertheless, the task remains one
of statutory construction. Although a provision of the Act must be given a liberal
and beneficial construction, a court or tribunal is not at liberty to give it a
construction that is unreasonable or unnatural.” (citations omitted)
[43] It is only if more than one interpretation is available or there is uncertainty as to the
meaning of the words that the beneficial interpretation approach arises – Victims
Compensation Fund Corporation v Brown13.
This Court’s decisions
[44] With that in mind, I turn to the decisions of this Court in which s 32 (or a predecessor
section) has been considered.
[45] In Q-COMP v Education Queensland (McArthur’s Case)14 Hall P considered the
predecessor section (s 34 WorkCover Queensland Act 1996) and said:
“There is an issue as to whether WorkCover Queensland Act 1996 (or the Workers’
Compensation and Rehabilitation Act 2003) is in the nature of beneficial legislation.
To the extent that the statutory measures serve as gatekeepers on the route to common
law damages, the statutory measures are plainly not beneficial. And in Kelly v
WorkCover Queensland [2002] 1 Qd R 496 at 498 Atkinson J decided as much.
However, I adhere to the view expressed in State of Queensland v Q-COMP and
Beverley Coyne (2003) 172 QGIG 1447 at 1448, that in providing benefits (not
10 (1988) 165 CLR 1 at 9.
11 (1984) 165 CLR 622.
12 (1997) 191 CLR 1 at 12.
13 (2003) 201 ALR 260 at [33] 269.
14 (2005) 179 QGIG 491.

15
otherwise available) to workers who suffer work related injuries, the statutory
measures are still properly characterised as beneficial. Indeed, the statutes themselves
say as much. The main objects of the WorkCover Queensland Act 1996 are stated at
Part 2, see s. 4(1). One of the objects is to provide benefits to workers who sustain
injury in their employment (and for their dependents), see s. 5(1)(a). By s. 4(2) the
objects are expressly made an aid to the interpretation of the Act. (The Workers’
Compensation and Rehabilitation Act 2003 does not renumber the relevant sections).
I do not however consider that characterisation of the statutes as beneficial assistance
in the interpretation of s. 34(5). Section 34(5) is plainly an exclusionary provision.
There is no rule that provisions by way of exception or exemption in a remedial act
are to be given a liberal interpretation compare Rose v Secretary Department of Social
Security (1990) 92 ALR 521 at 524. On the contrary, as Burchett J observed in
Commonwealth v Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission and Another
(1998) 152 ALR 182 at 189:
“Where remedial legislation contains exemptions designed to strike a careful and
practical balance between competing community interests, a court which distorts
that balance in the name of furthering the remedy risks serving a political role, and
in doing so, frustrating the will of parliament.”.
If there were any doubt that s. 34(5) was about balancing of competing public
interests, it is removed by the only relevant extrinsic material, viz. the Explanatory
Note to the Bill which (first) introduced the subsection:
“The exclusion criteria from the definition of injury … for psychiatric or
psychological conditions have been strengthened in response to an increasing
number of claims where remedial action regarding the worker’s poor performance
(one example of reasonable management action) was the stimulus for the claim.
…
This clause also excludes psychiatric or psychological injuries that result from
action being taken by WorkCover, or a self-insurer, in relation to the management
of a worker’s compensation claim including rejection of the claim or cessation of
an entitlement.”.
In my view s. 34(5) should not be read so as to maximise the remedial impact of s.
34(1) and (2).”15
[46] His Honour was, with respect, correct in his remarks concerning the effects of
exclusionary provisions. But the basic principle to be applied is that which is set out
above. The task remains one of ordinary statutory construction – one where a beneficial
interpretation of the whole of the section or chapter will be applied should more than one
interpretation be available. It is not the case that a reader advances through the Act,
identifying one section (or sub-section) as beneficial while another is not. The section and
its various parts must be read in context. The correct approach is to construe s 32 in the
ordinary way and then to call in aid the principles concerning beneficial legislation if that
becomes necessary.
[47] Later in his reasons in McArthur’s Case, Hall P said:
15 Q-COMP v Education Queensland (2005) 179 QGIG 491 at 492.

16
“The concern of s. 34(5) is to remove certain psychiatric and psychological
disorders from the statutory definition of “injury”. Where a situation arises in
which s. 34(1) “ropes-in” a particular psychiatric or psychological disorder and s.
34(5) excludes the same psychiatric or psychological disorder, there is an
inconsistency which because of the use of “notwithstanding” must be resolved by
allowing s. 34(5) to prevail.”16
[48] That is consistent with what his Honour said in Parker v Q-COMP17 when referring to
the scheme established by the Act:
“On its face s. 32(5), which is an exclusionary provision, is part of that scheme.
Because of the use of the word "despite" at s. 32(5), where s. 32(1) "ropes in" a
psychiatric or psychological condition and s. 32(5) excludes the same psychiatric
or psychological condition, the inconsistency is resolved by allowing s. 32(5) to
prevail, compare Q-COMP v Education Queensland (2005) 179 QGIG 491 at 492.
It is not legitimate to distort the balancing of competing community interests which
the modification of s. 32(1) by s. 32(5) is intended to achieve - and the Explanatory
Note to the Bill which introduced the forerunner of s. 32(5) showing an explicit
intention to balance is reproduced in Q-COMP v Education Queensland, ibid, at
592 - by limiting the scope of the expression "in the course of" or for that matter
the expression "arising out of" in order to maximise the reach of s. 32(1).”18
[49] In Q-COMP v Hohn19 Hall P appears to retreat slightly from the absolute position
advanced in the decisions referred to above. He said:
“… I should emphasise that the mere occurrence of reasonable management
action will not insulate a disorder from characterisation as an "injury". To
begin with, there will be cases in which the worker will decompensate before the
occurrence of the reasonable management action reasonably taken. To say of such
a disorder that it arose out of or in the course of reasonable management action
would be to make a finding in the teeth of the facts. Similarly, reasonable
management action reasonably taken, which precedes and is discrete from the
worker's decompensation may well be found not to be reasonable management
action which triggers the operation of s. 32(5). Whilst everything that happens in
an employment relation may, on one use of language, be said to arise out of creation
of the relationship, it would be risible to contend that all work-related disorders are
denied classification as an "injury" because the worker's original appointment
involved reasonable management action reasonably taken. Indeed, even
contemporaneity may not suffice to justify a conclusion that the disorder arose in
the course of reasonable management action reasonably taken. Where for example,
a worker suffers a schizophrenic reaction to the sight of a gruesome death of a
fellow employee, the circumstance that all occurred in an authorised rest break
would not attract the operation of s. 32(5).
16 Q-COMP v Education Queensland (2005) 179 QGIG 491 at 492.
17 (2007) 185 QGIG 269.
18 Parker v Q-COMP (2007) 185 QGIG 269 at 272-3.
19 (2008) 187 QGIG 139.

17
If indeed it was the submission of Q-COMP at first instance that once an injury
was in any way touched by reasonable management action reasonably taken it
is not compensable, I agree with the Commissioner (paragraph 3 at p. 666) that
such a submission "...overstates the effect of s. 32(5).". Indeed, in my view, the
submission is inconsistent with Delaney v Q-COMP (2005) 178 QGIG 197. That
case involved an appeal against a decision by an Acting Industrial Magistrate which
teased out the transactions and events and concluded that Mr Delaney's adjustment
disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood was attributable to a number of
interactions with his superiors each of which constituted reasonable management
action reasonably taken. There was a successful appeal to this Court. However, as
is pointed out at [71, 015] by the learned author of Watson, Industrial Laws of
Queensland (who appeared for Mr Delaney), Mr Delaney did not in that appeal
challenge every finding that an interaction contributing (in some way) to Mr
Delaney's decompensation was reasonable management action reasonably taken.
One finding was allowed to remain in place on the appeal. In consequence, Mr
Delaney was bound by the finding on the appeal. If the submission attributed to Q-
COMP at first instance was correct, Mr Delaney's appeal should have failed. The
appeal succeeded. The remaining finding of reasonable management action
reasonably taken was treated by both parties as inconsequential so long as it stood
alone.
Repudiation of the proposition that s. 32(5) only operates where the reasonable
management action is a significant contributing factor to a worker's
decompensation, does not require embrace of the proposition that other words,
viz., "or partly arising out of or in the course of reasonable management
action", are to be read into s. 32(5). I respectfully adopt the view of Watson, op.
cit., viz.:
"To read the subsection in that way would be to read into the subsection the
words 'or partly arising out of or in the course of'. Implying words into
legislation is not something that courts undertake lightly. See, for example,
what Callinan J said in Electrolux Home Products Pty Ltd v AWU (2004) 221
CLR 309; 209 ALR 116; [2004] HCA 40; BC200405590 at [239].
Further, the argument runs counter to the interpretation given to similar
legislation in other jurisdictions. See, for example, Rivard v Northern
Territory (1999) 129 NTR 1; 150 FLR 33; [1999] NTSC 28; BC9901148 at
[30].
It also runs contrary to logic. If there are eight stressors which gave rise to
the injury and they all arise out of or in the course of employment only seven
are significant contributors whereas the eighth is exceedingly minor but arises
from reasonable management action taken in a reasonable way, where is the
justification for denying a claimant compensation in those circumstances?".
Each of the propositions contended for by the Commissioner and the proposition
attributed to Q-COMP suffer from the same vice. Additional words are read into
the statute. In my view s. 32(5) should be permitted to speak for itself. Figurative
language and undue conceptualism are to be deprecated. In many cases, as on the

18
facts in Q-COMP v Education Queensland (2005) 179 QGIG 491 at 491 (first 3
paragraphs), the correct application of the statutory language will be pellucidly
clear. Doubtless, there will be difficult cases. Doubtless, it is for that reason that
Industrial Commissioners and Industrial Magistrates are entrusted with the
appeals.”20
[50] In Q-COMP v Rowe21 Hall P noted that he could not recall Q-COMP advancing an
argument of the type advanced by the Regulator in this case. He said:
“In fairness to Q-COMP I should say that I cannot recollect an occasion on which
(in this Court), Q-COMP has submitted that "… even if one stressor is caught by
reasonable management action that will be sufficient to remove the
psychiatric/psychological disorder from the definition of injury in s. 32(1) of the
Act.". Neither have I any recollection of accepting such a proposition. Indeed, such
a proposition is not consistent with the decision in Delaney v Q-COMP (2005) 178
QGIG 197. In Delaney v Q-COMP, ibid, the claimant succeeded though the sixth
stressor (not as was contended for Q-COMP in this Appeal the first stressor) was
found to be but blemished management action. With respect to the Commissioner
the decision in Prizeman v Q-COMP (2005) 180 QGIG 481, dealt with the converse
proposition, viz., that if after eliminating all stressors which arose out of or in the
course of reasonable management action reasonably taken, a stressor or stressors
remained, the claimant was entitled to succeed. The earlier decision in Q-COMP
v Education Queensland (2005) 179 QGIG 491 established the critical
proposition that s. 32(5) of the Act is concerned with withdrawing injuries
from s. 34(1) of the Act and is not concerned with nominating the "stressors"
which may be taken into account. The passage from the Industrial Laws of
Queensland, is by way of commentary upon the decision of this Court in Q-
COMP v Hohn (2008) 187 QGIG 139. It is made by way of comment upon the
rejection of the view that so long as a psychological/psychiatric injury is
"touched" by reasonable management action reasonably taken, it will be
withdrawn from the statutory definition of "injury" by the operation of s.
32(5)(a) of the Act. The passage is plainly correct. It is the effect of the decision
in Q-COMP v Hohn, ibid, that a claimant may succeed though some of the
operative events or stressors arise out of or occur in the course of reasonable
management action taken in a reasonable way. However, "may" cannot be read
as "must": nor may the passage be read as asserting that an Appeal Body is at liberty
to allow a claimant to succeed where at least one stressor does not "… arise or occur
in the course of reasonable management action taken in a reasonable way". In all
such cases, the Appeal Tribunal will be required to embark upon the enquiry
whether the psychological/psychiatric injury arose out of or in the course of
reasonable management action taken in a reasonable way.”22
[51] Consistent with his remarks in Rowe, Hall P said the following in Q-COMP v Hochen23:
20 Q-COMP v Hohn (2008) 187 QGIG 139 at 144-5.
21 (2009) 191 QGIG 67.
22 Q-COMP v Rowe (2009) 191 QGIG 67 at 71-2.
23 Q-COMP AND Malcolm Hochen (C/2009/47) – Decision <http://www.qirc.qld.gov.au>.

19
“[15] … Section 32(5)(a) of the Act requires the insurer, Q-COMP and any
appellate tribunal to enquire whether the psychological injury arose out of or in the
course of reasonable management action taken in a reasonable way. The presence
of unreasonable management action with a sufficient causal connection to the
injury may require that a negative answer be given to the question posed by s.
32(5)(a).”
[52] In Davis v Blackwood24 I said:
“[51] I agree with the reasoning of Hall P in Q-Comp v Hohn where he said that the
mere occurrence of reasonable management action will not insulate a disorder from
characterisation as an “injury”. In cases such as this the Commission will be aided
by expert evidence which can assist in the assignment of weight to the various
factors which go to the creation of maintenance of a psychiatric disorder. If the
evidence supports a finding that the psychiatric disorder results from the
employment being a significant contributing factor then, when one turns to consider
s 32(5), it is important to determine to what extent, if any, there is an overlap of
reasonable management action and other employment factors.”
[53] In Blackwood v Adams25 I agreed26 with what Hall P had said in Hochen, namely, that an
enquiry as to whether or not unreasonable management action was the dominant cause of
an injury was an erroneous approach.
[54] The history of the consideration given to s 32 (and its predecessor) is consistent with
application of the principle cited in Bird v The Commonwealth, namely, “where two
constructions of a Workers’ Compensation Act are possible that which is favourable to
the worker should be preferred”. The construction favoured by this Court has been that a
worker can suffer a compensable injury even if reasonable management action has had
some causative effect.
[55] Where the only cause of a personal injury is reasonable management action etc. then s
32(5) will work to exclude it from the definition of “injury” in s 32(1). The difficulty, as
has become painfully obvious over the years, is where a psychiatric or psychological
disorder can be seen to have arisen from a mixture of actions including reasonable
management action. Experience in this jurisdiction shows that it is not uncommon for
psychiatric disorders to be the result of a number of factors.
[56] There is another difficulty in the construction of s 32(5). The clause “arising out of” can
be readily understood when combined with “reasonable management action” as requiring
the demonstration of a causal relationship. But the phrase “in the course of” is not as easy
to understand in this context. “In the course of” would, in ordinary language, be nothing
more than a wordy way of saying “during”. The term has been interpreted as only
requiring a temporal connection. It has caused difficulty when connected with
“employment”, particularly in the so-called “interval” cases and to connect it to
“reasonable management action etc.” increases the difficulty of comprehension. The High
24 [2014] ICQ 009.
25 [2015] ICQ 001.
26 Simon Blackwood (Workers’ Compensation Regulator) v Adams [2015] ICQ 001 at [23].

20
Court devoted many paragraphs to an examination of the meaning of the term in Comcare
v PVYW27 but it was concerned with an injury which occurred during an interval and,
naturally, concentrated on the relationship the term had with employment. To then
attempt to construe “a psychological … disorder arising …in the course of … the
worker’s expectation … of reasonable management action …” only compounds the
difficulty. It might be thought that the transplantation of “arising out of, or in the course
of” into s 32(5) was not the best way of expressing Parliament’s intention.
[57] The difficulties in construing s 32(5) support the conclusion that more than one
interpretation of s 32 is available and that, therefore, the beneficial interpretation approach
should be applied. In the cases decided in this Court any attempt to provide some type of
formula or application of dominant cause has been rejected. Section 32 must be applied
in the light of the evidence accepted by the Commission. If, after considering all the
relevant evidence and weighing up the factors which were accepted as having given rise
to the personal injury, the Commission forms the conclusion that any of the conduct
referred to in s 32(5) does not, on balance, displace the evidence in favour of the worker
then a finding in the worker’s favour must follow.
Conclusion
[58] For the reasons given above, the Deputy President did not err in his assessment of the
evidence and his findings were justified by that evidence.
[59] The appeal is dismissed.
27 (2013) 250 CLR 246.